Here are the SQL commands to retrieve and manipulate data from the employees and departments tables of the XYZ Corp. database:

a. Write a query to select all columns and rows from the employees table.
SELECT * FROM employees;

This command selects all the columns and rows from the employees table.

b. Write a query to select only the name and salary columns of all employees with a salary greater than 50000.

SELECT name, salary FROM employees WHERE salary > 50000;


This command selects only the name and salary columns of all employees with a salary greater than 50000.

c. Write a query to calculate the average salary of all employees.

SELECT AVG(salary) FROM employees;

This command calculates the average salary of all employees.

d. Write a query to count the number of employees who work in the "Marketing" department.

SELECT COUNT(*) FROM employees WHERE department_id = (SELECT id FROM departments WHERE name = 'Marketing');

This command counts the number of employees who work in the "Marketing" department.

e. Write a query to update the salary column of the employee with an id of 1001 to 60000.
UPDATE employees SET salary = 60000 WHERE id = 1001;

This query updates the salary column of the employee with an id of 1001 to 60000.

f. Write a query to delete all employees whose salary is less than 30000.
DELETE FROM employees WHERE salary < 30000;

This query deletes all employees from the employees table whose salary is less than 30000.

a. Write a query to select all columns and rows from the departments table.

SELECT * FROM departments;

This query selects all columns and rows from the departments table and displays them.

b. To select only the name and manager columns of the "Finance" department, we can use the following SQL command:
SELECT name, manager FROM departments WHERE name = 'Finance';

This command retrieves the name and manager columns of the "Finance" department.

c. To calculate the total number of employees in each department, we can use the following SQL command:
SELECT departments.name, COUNT(employees.id) FROM departments LEFT JOIN employees ON departments.id = employees.department_id GROUP BY departments.name;


This command first performs a left join between the departments and employees tables on the department_id column, and then counts the number of employees in each department using the COUNT() function and GROUP BY statement.

d. To insert a new department called "Research" with a manager named "John Doe", we can use the following SQL command:
INSERT INTO departments (name, manager) VALUES ('Research', 'John Doe');

This command inserts a new row into the departments table with the specified name and manager values.



